Module 1 (SB 1.1-9)

9. Queen Kunti prays for more and more difficulties so that she could remember
Krsña.

a. Derive principles for personal application for your practice of Krsña
consciousness, from Queen Kunti’s attitude.
b. Write your thoughts on presenting such a mood of a devotee to a newcomer or
a non-practitioner of Krsña consciousness.

1.8.25 Wish calamities would happen again to see Krishna, no longer see
repeated births and deaths. Not once, many times. Krishna's darshan, no darshan
of material existence. Impediment becomes impetus. Intimacy and affection for
Krishna. Inconceivable to even think of it. For pious, if calamity, no other
alternative than taking shelter of the Lord's lotus feet. Preparing for
liberation from birth and death. Welcome. Appreciate. Opportunity to remember
the Lord. Boat for crossing the ocean of nescience as one leaps over the holes
made by the hooves of a calf. Monsoon, Goshala. Undisturbed as calamities sure
to happen. Suffering all sorts of unavoidable misfortunes. Good or bad means
favorable or unfavorable for Krishna Consciousness.

Spirit soul transcendental to all material, so called, calamities. Like tiger
swallowing men in dream. Unreal. Calamities, dangers, very good if remind us of
Kṛṣṇa. This (material) world, full of dangers. Tolerate. No diversion. No other
remedy. Foolish struggle for existence to avoid this. Material business: work
hard, earn money, enjoy old life without working. No one wants to work. Retire
from work and become happy as soon as money available. Bodily concept of
life. Real danger, repetition of birth and death. Ocean, may have very strong
ship, but can never be safe, dangers at any time. Sharks. Titanic was safe, but
sank on first voyage. Many important men died. Instead, cross over this sea of
danger as soon as possible. Spiritual boat, ability to make material ocean
small. Not disturbed by the sea waves. Get out to the other side. Develop our
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, after giving up this body, go back home, back to Godhead.

London, sometimes chilly, taking morning bath a little difficult. Still,
regular bath, prescribed duty. Even if suffering. Tapasya, or austerity. Go on
harinam even in the rainy climate. Proceed with our business (of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness) despite all the dangers and calamities of this world. Voluntary
acceptance of difficulties of life. Chant, dance, live peacefully, take
kṛṣṇa-prasāda, be happy.

Devotee never disturbed by dangers, reverses, or calamities. Dangers and
festivals are but Krishna's different demonstrations. Absolute. Vedic
literature, religion and irreligion, complete opposites, merely God's
front-back portions. Surrender to Krishna. Remember Kṛṣṇa at dangerous times.
Prahlāda’s father putting him into dangerous predicaments, was always thinking
of Kṛṣṇa. Seeing or remembering Kṛṣṇa means advancing in spiritual life, not
have to suffer any more of these dangers. If comfortable, but at death, getting
a cat, dog or mouse body, no benefit. Enough money, food, good estate, ample
comforts. Body finished, no birth again, let me enjoy life. Modern philosophy
of hedonism. Not factual. Consciousness should be absorbed in Kṛṣṇa thought.

Pray: My Lord, Your great mercy, blessing, that I have been put into this
dangerous position. Because of past deeds, meant to suffer very much. But You
are mitigating suffering and giving me only a little. By your grace, only token
punishment. I deserve a lot more.

Like high-court judge finding important men culprit. Able to give a fine of
thousand dollars or more, but fine greatly reduced and minimised as special
treatment.

One destined for death, but instead of being killed with a knife, get some
little cut on the finger. Even if devotees have a history of very grievous
criminal activities behind, little cut. So, why fear?

Just utter dependence on Krishna. Intesense feeling. True benefit. Highest
gain. Careful. Before winning Kurukṣetra war, Pāṇḍavas put into many dangers.
Given poison, house of lac set afire, confronted with great man-eating demons.
Lost their kingdom, wife, prestige. Exiled to the forest. Throughout dangers,
Kṛṣṇa present. Supplying cloth to Draupadī, etc. Such pious devotees also
suffering. Not that become a devotee, no danger or suffering. Prahlāda and
Haridāsa Ṭhākura suffered greatly. 

Firm faith, conviction, Kṛṣṇa present, will give me protection. No benefit of
any shelter other than Kṛṣṇa. Always take to Kṛṣṇa. BG: My devotee is never
vanquished. Take and adhere to Kṛṣṇa consciousness under all circumstances,
even in the most dangerous position. Keep our faith in Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, and
there will be no danger.

Therefore, I should not lament on material challenges, like financial in
London, business at work, health or familial issues. I should always remember
Krishna and never Forget Him.

===============================================================================

10. “The subject matter which attracts the dying man becomes the beginning of
his next life.” Based on how Bhismadeva left his body, present your views on,
“Life – An art of dying.”

1.9.29

Benediction to die at his will. Auspicious time came. Wanted to move out.
Golden opportunity. Sun’s course ran into the northern hemisphere. This period
desired by mystics.

Perfect yogīs or mystics can leave the material body at their own sweet will at
a suitable time and go to a suitable planet desired by them. BG 8.24,
self-realized souls, exactly identified themselves with the interest of the
Lord, can generally leave the material body during the time of the fire-god's
effulgence, when sun in the northern horizon, thus achieve the transcendental
sky. In the Vedas, these times auspicious for quitting the body, taken
advantage of. Different science, Bhīṣmadeva knew well how to utilize it.
Prepared himself to quit his body before the exalted Kṛṣṇa, the pious Pāṇḍavas
and great sages headed by Bhagavān Vyāsa, etc., all great souls.

1.9.30

Spoke on different subjects with thousands of meanings, fought on thousands of
battlefields and protected thousands of men, stopped speaking, completely freed
from all bondage, withdrew his mind from everything else and fixed his
wide-open eyes upon Kṛṣṇa, standing before him, four-handed, dressed in yellow
garments that glittered and shined.

In the momentous hour of leaving his material body, Bhīṣmadeva set the glorious
example concerning the important function of the human form of life. If one
absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa, sure to go back to Godhead without any doubt.
Confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā, 8.5-15.

He gave big seminars. Stopped everything. Focused all his thoughts, attention,
words, everything on Krishna. Mind mainly. Withdrawing senses. Sensory
functions not manifesting. Totally detached. Completely given his mind. Rapt in
his thought on some object at the time of his death, will attain that object.
Prabhupada gives a series of verses. These are the way of living the body.

Bhīṣmadeva attained the perfection of quitting his body at will, was fortunate
enough to have Kṛṣṇa, the object of his attention, personally present at the
time of death. Therefore fixed his open eyes upon Him, wanted to see Kṛṣṇa for
a long time out of his spontaneous love for Him. Pure devotee, very little to
do with the detailed performance of yogic principles. Not very much accepted.
Simple bhakti-yoga enough to bring about perfection. Bhīṣmadeva's ardent desire
to see Kṛṣṇa's person, the most lovable object, and by the Lord's grace, had
this opportunity at the last stage of his breathing.

1.9.31

Pure meditation, looking at Kṛṣṇa, once freed from all material
inauspiciousness, relieved of all bodily pains caused by the arrow wounds. All
the external activities of his senses at once stopped, prayed transcendentally
to the controller of all living beings while quitting his material body.

Illusion at once removed when Lord arrived. Like sun, illusory, external
material energy darkness. In sun's presence, no darkness stands. All material
contamination completely removed. Bhīṣmadeva able to be transcendentally
situated by stopping the activities of the impure senses in collaboration with
matter. Attained all these transcendental conditions prior to his leaving the
material body because of Lord’s presence. Provided all facilities to fulfill
the transcendental desires of His great devotee, praying.

1.9.32

Statesman, head of the Kuru dynasty, great general, kṣatriya leader, his mind
was strewn over so many subjects, thinking, feeling and willing engaged in
different matters. To achieve pure devotional service, wanted to invest all
entirely in Kṛṣṇa. Described as the leader of the devotees and all-powerful.
Pure devotees of the Lord have no desire other than His service. Called
sātvata. The Lord is the chief amongst such sātvatas. Bhīṣmadeva had no other
desires. Unless one purified from all sorts of material desires, the Lord does
not become one's leader. Desires cannot be wiped out, but have only to be
purified.

Confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā (10.10) by the Lord Himself that He gives His
instruction from within the heart of a pure devotee who is constantly engaged
in the Lord's service.

Therefore, we should aim for dying as much as possible like Bhīṣmadeva.

===============================================================================

11. What general principles can we draw from Bhismadeva’s episode about

(i) Welcoming guests

1.9.9

Received and welcomed all the great and powerful ṛṣis assembled.  Knew
perfectly all the religious principles according to time and place. Dharma
according to desa, kala, vibhavagit. Dharmajnah, knower of religious
principles. Not just theory, but also practice.

Expert religionists know perfectly how to adjust religious principles in terms
of time and place. All great ācāryas, religious preachers or reformers of the
world executed their mission by adjustment of religious principles in terms of
time and place. Shastra gives direction. Knows their import.
Guru-sadhu-shastra, also. Like Dhruva, take water. No metal deity, but clay, in
the forest.

Different climates and situations in different parts of the world. If one to
discharge one's duties to preach the Lord's message, must be expert in
adjusting things. Maturity. Bhīṣmadeva, one of the twelve great authorities in
preaching this cult of devotional service. Could receive and welcome all the
powerful sages assembled at his deathbed from all parts of the universe.

Certainly unable at that time to welcome and receive them physically. Neither
at home nor in a normal healthy condition. But was quite fit by the activities
of his sound mind. Could utter sweet words with hearty expressions. All of them
were well-received. One can perform one’s duty by physical work, mind and
words. Knew well how to utilize them in the proper place. No difficulty to
receive them, although physically unfit.

(ii) Power of time?

1.9.14

All due to inevitable time, under whose control everyone in every planet
carried, as clouds by the wind.

Dependent. Any living entities, human beings, under the influence of time. From
beginning to end. Teachings of Lord Kapila. Maitreya. Only Krishna beyond.
Sunrise, sunset, time passes, one day. Changing seasons, circumstances, dealings.
Winter, wearing warm clothes. Summer, really hot, hard to stand. No influence
on pure devotees dedicated to Krishna-katha. Death, ultimate form of time. No
bewilderment.

Control by time all over the space and planets within the universe. Residents,
rulers, etc. All the big gigantic planets, including sun, controlled by the
force of air, as clouds carried by the force of air. Similarly, the inevitable
kāla, time, controls even the action of the air and other elements. Everything
controlled by the supreme kāla, the Lord's forceful representative within the
material world. Yudhiṣṭhira should not be sorry for the inconceivable action
of time. Have to bear the actions and reactions of time within the conditions
of the material world. Yudhiṣṭhira should not think that he had committed sins
in previous birth and suffering the consequence. Even the most pious has to
suffer the condition of material nature. Pious men faithful to Krishna. Guided
by the bona fide brāhmaṇa and Vaiṣṇava following the religious principles.
These three guiding principles should be the aim of life. Should not be
disturbed by the tricks of eternal time. Even the great controller of the
universe, Brahmājī, also under the control of that time. End of the day, has to
sleep. End of his life, has to merge into Vishnu's body. Should not grudge thus
controlled by time despite a true follower of religious principles.

1.9.15

Influence of inevitable time! Irreversible.

As far as the material or spiritual resources required, no scarcity in the
Pāṇḍavas' case. Materially, well-equipped. Two great warriors, namely Bhīma and
Arjuna. Spiritually, the King, symbol of religion. Above all, Kṛṣṇa, personally
concerned with their affairs as well-wisher. Yet, so many reverses on the
Pāṇḍavas's side. Despite the power of pious acts, personalities, expert
management and weapons under the direct supervision of Kṛṣṇa, Pāṇḍavas suffered
so many practical reverses, due to the influence of kāla. No protection.
Tribulations. Kāla is identical with the Lord Himself. The influence of kāla
indicates the inexplicable wish of the Lord Himself. No lamentation when matter
beyond the control of any human being. Problem, if we can do something about
it, why worry. If not, why worry. Accept the situations when arriving.
Radhanath Maharaja, Krishna's mercy. 
