Video: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eDtfvFsh9SQ
Audio: https://www.youtube.com/redirect?event=video_description&v=eDtfvFsh9SQ&redir_token=rDm8wE4EsqZ5970-HK0mJbCFIMp8MTU0ODQ5MDU2OEAxNTQ4NDA0MTY4&q=http%3A%2F%2Fbhakticourses.com%2Fwp-content%2Faudio%2Fbhakti-shastri%2FBhakti_Shastri_159_-_Nectar_of_Devotion_Chapter_14_%26_15_-_From_Vaidhi_Bhakti_to_Raganuga_Bhakti_-_Chaitanya_Charan_Prabhu.mp3

        śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭaḿ sthāpitaḿ yena bhū-tale
        svayaḿ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaḿ dadāti sva-padāntikam

Hare Krishna. Welcome back to the Bhakti Shastri course. We are in "The Nectar
of Devotion". We will just be completing the wave of "Nectar of Devotion" which
talks about vaidhi-bhakti. And then, we will move into "rāgānugā-bhakti". You
know. So, you know, "vaidhi-bhakti" and "rāgānugā-bhakti", both are parts of
sadhana-bhakti. And, you know, in sadhana-bhakti, the 64 items were discussed.
And after discussing the 64 items, you know, towards the end of the last
chapter, the discussion was started about what is the relationship of sadh...,
of the sadhana-bhakti. Or specifically, "vaidhi-bhakti" with other aspects. So,
is sadhana-bhakti dependent on varnashram? "Rūpa Gosvāmī" has already discussed
this, initially, earlier only. And we discussed how Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, you
know, rejected the self-identification with any of the varnas. Or any of the
ashramas. So, bhakti is not dependent on varna. Or ashram. And we see some of
the greatest devotees, where, you know, you know, you know, you know, you know,
you know, where, you know, you know, from the, what, who was conventially
cons..., considered lower caste. Or even the outcastes. But they are all
considered to be great devotees. So, bhakti is not dependent on varnashram. Now,
in this chapter, nine..., the chapter 14, "Devotional Qualifications". You know.
You know. See, here, the focus shifts onto, you know, you know, Srila Prabhupada
is going to discuss "knowledge and renunciation". So:

"Some scholars recommend that knowledge and renunciation are important factors
for elevating oneself to devotional service."

But Prabhupada immediately says:

"actually that is not a fact."

You know. You know. So, kali, jnana and "vairāgya" are not included in the 64
items of devotional service directly. You know. And we may say that, how is
this? Aren't they important on the spiritual path? Yes. They are impor..., they
may be important on the spiritual path. But we are not talking about a general
spiritual path. We are talking about the devotional path. Bhakti yoga. And in
bhakti yoga, jnana and "vairāgya" are not integral elements. They can be
helpful. But, you know, they are not always necessarily helpful. So, you know,
you know, in, from the academic pers..., from the perspective of the
impersonalist, they consider the essence of spiritual advancement is to
cultivate knowledge. And to develop "vair...", renunciation. So, the idea is, we
see, even in Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's pastimes, after Chaitanya Mahaprabhu's older
brother, you know, "Viśvarūpa" takes sannyasa. Then, his parents, by, his
father, especially, Jagannath Mishra says that let us stop the studies of Nimai.
And what is the reasoning he gives? He says, if he studies the shashtras, then
he will realise how this world is a place of misery. And then, he will also want
to renounce the world. And when he renounc..., and then, we will lose him, also.
So, better, let him not study the shastra. So, the idea is, in the traditional
sense, jnana will lead to "vairāgya". Knowledge engenders renunciation. Because
we understand how this world is temporary. And how we need to go beyond this
world. But in today's culture, jnana is not leading to "vairāgya" most of the
time. In fact, jnana leads to "raga". In fact, the "raga" is, has got nothing to
do with "rāgānugā-bhakti". That is entirely different category which we will
discuss later. "raga" here refers to attachment. Most knowledge today is
concerned with, you know, you know, how to enjoy the material world more. So,
for example, you know, very simple example. You know. Say, somebody, you know,
knows how to, has the knowledge of how to operate a computer. And how to surf on
the net. Then, with that knowledge, that person goes and starts surfing many
nasty sites. And contaminates one's own mind. Now, you know, in order to protect
such a person, you know, say, some internet filters may be put on the computer.
So that the person does not go to any wrong sites. But if that person has a lot
of jnana, that person may know how to bypass those filters. And do whatever
business, you know, whatever nonsense is to be, whatever, you know, you know,
want, wants to do. Without being detected. So, what is happening? The jnana is
being used for that? For "raga". For enjoying more and more. Srila Prabhupada
also states thus in one of his letters. He says, we are meant to use our
intelligence to control the enjoying mentality. But our problem is that we are
used to enjoying intelligently. Actually, there is no such thing as intelligent
enjoyment. Intelligent enjoyment would be actually spiritual enjoyment. All
material enjoyment is ignorant enjoyment. But intelligent enjoyment, Prabhupada
gives us to refer to the fact that we use our intelligence to further our
enjoyment. And we see most of the technology is used for that purpose. So, when
there are, you know, you know, computer screens which, you know, display with a
very high clarity images. And with a high, and then, what do people use it to
see nasty images, and contaminate their minds. So, basically, you know, now,
jnana leads to "raga". You know. In today's society.

Now, you know, in the impersonalist path, the idea is if we get jnana, then we
will get "vairāgya". And then, we get jnana about "vairāg...", so:

        brahma satyam jagat mithya

So, their idea is, the jnana will help us understand how brahma is "satyam". And
in, by "vairāgya", "jagat mithya" will give it up. That is the idea. Now, that
is in one sense true. But the whole philosophical foundation is incomplete. This
world is not false. It is temporary. And brahma is not just an impersonal one,
is, Brahma is a person. And we have to develop love for that person. So, we
cannot approach Krishna merely through knowledge. Earlier, we discussed the
example of an analytical and an aesthetic approach. Towards the flower. So, the
jnani approach is like the analytical approach towards the Absolute Truth. One,
it might lead to some passive meditation in the Absolute Truth. But it does not
lead to active attraction. So, for active attraction, you know, you know, you
know, we need, you know, aesthetic appreciation. You know. We appreciate
Krishna as a person. As a Kri..., a person who loves. And who loves to be loved.
Krishna loves us. And He loves to be loved by us. He is "bhava-grahi". He is
"bhakta-vatsala". He is hungry for the devotion of His devotees. And He, you
know, wants us to love Him. And we express our love through serving Him. So,
this requires not just the analytical understanding. But an aesthetic
appreciation. Which is expressed through emo..., devotion. And through service.
So, for the path of, for the path of bhakti, jnana and "vairāgya" are definitely
not necessary. And they are not always anikul. You know. You know. You know. Why
not always anikul? Because when we, you know, have jnana or "vairāgya", too much
analysis will make us make, you know, make us, you know, see the Absolute Truth
as primarily an object of analysis. Not an object of devotion. And if we have
too much "vairāgya". If we just say no, no, no to emotions, then not only do we
say no to material emotions. But we end up saying no to spiritual emotions,
also. So, actually, we want to be detached. But detached from Maya. Not from
Krishna. In fact, our problem, many people think that the, our problem is,
att..., attachment. But actually, our problem is not attachment. Our problem is
detachment. Our problem is not attachment to Maya. Our problem is detachment
from Krishna. Because we are detached from Krishna, that is why we fall, our
pleasure-searching pros..., pleasure-seeking propensity makes us look for
alternative sources of pleasure. Other than Krishna. And then, we become
attracted to Maya. And then, we fall into illusion. And the temptations that
illusions present us. So, to correct the situation, what we need is not
detachment. But attachment. We need attachment to Krishna. And of course, along
with attachment to Krishna, we also need detachment from matter. We have
discussed in our earlier Isopanishad class, these four categories of people. If
you remember. You know. Those who are attached to matter. And detached from
Krishna. Or attached to Maya. Detached from Krishna. They are the materialists.
You know. Those who are, you know, detached from matter. And attached to
Krishna. They are the devotees. So, materialists. And the devotees. They are the
extreme. So, one, you know, devotees are detached from matter. And attached to
Krishna. But in, but, actually, you know, apart from these two categories. Not
two extremes. They are the two, two pa..., you know, two situations we can say.
Materialists. And spi..., devotees. But in-between, there are those who are
attached to matter. And attached to Krishna. They are the "sahajiya"s. So, they
are not really authentic devotees. On the other hand, we also have those who are
detached from matter. And detached from Krishna, also. They are the
impersonalists. So, for them, there is no rasa.

So, jnana and "vairāgya" often takes a person towards the impersonal
orientation. Where a person is detached from matter. And detached from Krishna,
also. That kind of heart is not very suited for devotion to Krishna. It is not
very suited for, you know, feeling. Feelings. For experiencing and relishing
emotions. And relationship with Krishna. So, of course, "Jīva Gosvāmī", you
know, in his commentary to the, you know, "Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu",
"Durgama-saṅgamanī", he explains how there is bhakti anikul jnana. And there is
bhakti pratikul jnana. So, in intention. In constit..., in constitution. And in
destination. Intention means what is the goal. You know. In constitution means,
what is it made up of. And destination means where it takes one. So, in
intention. Constitution. And destination. The bhakti anikul jnana is different
from the bhakti pratikul jnana. Bhakti pratikul jnana, in intention, the goal
is, oh, it is to minimise the difference between us and God. Because that is
Brahma. I am Brahma. "Aham Brahmasmi". So, in intention, the idea is to focus on
our oneness with God. In, you know, in con..., this constitution, that knowledge
leads to, that knowledge leads to the drying up of the heart. Because there is
no difference between us and God. There is no need for relationship. There is no
need for emotions. And in destination, that takes one towards impersonal
Brahman. And that is definitely not favorable for bhakti.

        kaivalyam narakayate

We have discussed earlier how, for a devotee, liberation is like hell. Now, as
contrasted with that, there is bhakti anikul jnana. This is, in intention,
constitution, and destination, different. In intention, this knowledge focuses on
the difference between us and Krishna. So that we understand how wonderfully
lovable Krishna is. So, we understand, we are tiny. We are "anu". Krishna is
"vibhu". We are maya dhee..., dheen. Which Krishna is maya dheesh. We are
controlled by Maya. Krishna is the controller of Maya. So, this knowledge, which
is bhakti anikul, focuses on the glory of Krishna. And thereby, it attracts us
to love Him. You know. So, in intention, it is not to minimise the difference.
But it is to highlight the difference. And one is, and then, then, in
constitution, it consi..., consists, not of impersonal Brahman. It consists of
the pastimes, and the qualities, and the glories of Krishna. And in destination,
it takes, it appea..., increases the bhakti in our heart. And takes us to the
per..., to the spiritual world. Not just to the impersonal spiritual sky. But to
the spiritual planets. Where we live forever in love with Krishna. And His
intimate associates. So, this is with respect to jnana. That jnana can be
anikul. If it is emphasising the difference between us and the Lord. It is, you
know, talking about the glories of the Lord. And it increases our devotion to
the Lord. And takes Him to Him. takes us to Him. And it is pratikul if it, in
intention, is, you know, focusing on just our oneness with God. In constitution,
it focuses on, you know, you know, the qualitiless, formless, activitiless
Brahman. And in destination, it dries up our emotions. And takes us, at best,
towards impersonal Brahman. So, this is how jnana is favorable. And unfavorable.
Depending on, you know, what to, what is the intention, constitution, and
destination are. You know. And then, this jnana, bhakti anikul jnana, we do not
have to do any separate process to, any process to acquire it. Which has the
"śravaṇaṁ" and "kīrtanaṁ" that we do, will help us to develop jnana. Bhakti
anikul jnana. And then, what about "vairāgya"? Then, you know, so, here, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī", you know, you know, you know, defines "markaṭa-vairāgya". And
"phalgu-vairāgya". We have discussed these concepts earlier. "markaṭa" means
monkey. So, monkey renunciaton. You know. So, Prabhupada would say that, monkey
seems to, very renounced. You know. Does not have any home. So, lives in a
forest. And does not even have any clothes. You know. There are some bar. Some
renunciates called naga babas, who say, they, they do not wear any clothes. They
say, we want to live with the way nature produced us. So, nat..., nature
produced us without any clothes. So, we will live without clothes. Well, we may
say like that, I want to live the way nature produced me. But then, the nature
itself changes me. You know. When I am a baby, my desires are different. And as
I grow up, my desires become different. So, as I grow up, especially when we
come into puberty, then the sexual attraction increases. And, you know, you
know, if one is unclothed, then it quite often happens that, you know, one, you
know, feels more sexually agitated. And one, in, may agitate others sexually.
That is why in civilised society, you know, we, you know, clothes are, you know,
prescribed. Almost everywhere. So, the idea is that we want to say, you know, I
may say I want to live the way the nature tell, nature has produced me. But
nature itself changes me. And when we recognise that nature is changing us.
Then, we should, you know, hon..., honor that. And adapt our own dress
accordingly.

So, anyway, the point which we are making over here is, we are talking about
renunciation. So, like these unclothed renunciates, the monkeys may also be
wearing, not wearing any clothes. So, they have no home. They have no clothes.
But Prabhupada would say that, they have, sometimes, a dozens of she-monkeys.
And they unite with anyone. And everyone. Like that. So, you know, you know,
that way, the monkeys are not really renounced. There is only a show of
renunciation externally. But if we look closer, we will find that there is no
renunciation. So, similarly, you know, there are many people who, you know, act
as renunciates. But they are not renunciates. They are pseudo renunciate. They
bring a bad name to the renounced order. And that sort of renunciation is not at
all good. So, this is false renunciation. In, there is internal attachment. But
there is external in..., external show of detachment. You know. Krishna also
talks about this in:

        mithyācāraḥ sa ucyate

But this is "markaṭa-vairāgya". It, what "Jīva Gosvā...", "Rūpa Gosvāmī" talks
about is two different kinds of "vairāgya" is, so, "markaṭa-vairāgya" is
definitely not recommended. But he talks about "yukta-vairāgya". And
"phalgu-vairāgya". "yukta-vairāgya" is do use in Krishna's service whatever is
usable. Whatever is desirable.
        
        anāsaktasya viṣayān, yathārham upayuñjataḥ
        nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe, yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate

So, "anāsaktasya". One is not attached for oneself. "viṣayān". Sense objects.
Without being attached to the sense objects. "yathārham upayuñjataḥ". One uses
as is required. As is appropriate. You know. You know. "nirbandhaḥ
kṛṣṇa-sambandhe". "nirbandhaḥ". One does not become bound oneself. But one sees
the "kṛṣṇa-sambandhe" of everything. And uses those in Krishna's service. So, we
may use technology. You know. We, for now, for example, now, we are using the
internet. We are using, you know, we are using cellphones. We are using mobi...,
you know, various other gadgets, you know, now, we do not use it for our own
enjoyment. We use it for Krishna's service. And that is "yukta-vairāgya". And on
the other hand:

        prāpañcikatayā buddhyā hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ
        mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate

You know. So, that which can be used in Krishna's service, if one renounces
that, and not seeing the spiritual potential, then that is considered a
"phalgu-vairāgya". So, "phalgu-vairāgya" and "markaṭa-vairāgya" are not the same
thing. "markaṭa-vairāgya" is making a false show of renunciation. While being
renounced, det..., attached internally. Whereas "phalgu-vairāgya" is not
understanding the spiritual potential of things. And renouncing them when they
can be used in Krishna's service. So, for example, Prabhupada would often quote
that there was some, you know, you know, you know, you know, sannyasi. Who was
so detached. That he would never accept money from anyone. And at one night, one
night, so, where he would sleep, under his mat, somebody put a coin. And then,
he just could not sleep. When he laid down, also. And then, finally, you know,
he could not sleep, could not sleep, could not sleep, and then, his followers
came. And then, they searched in the, they found under the mat, you know,
morning, he says, as long as money is there next to time, you know, he says, I
will not, you know, I cannot sleep. You know. Take the money away. And the money
was taken away. Then, he went to sleep. And people say, how renounced he was. He
did not, just the, just the presence of money took away his sleep. So, he does
not, cannot tolerate the presence of money. How detached he is. But Prabhupada
says, this is "phalgu-vairāgya". Money, to see it as materially rejected, is
partial within. You know. More complete, and of course, to see mater..., money
as meant for our enjoyment is even incomplet..., even more incomplete vision.
But the complete vision is to see money as Lakshmi Devi. And to use, to unite
Lakshmi Devi with Narayan. That means to use money in Krishna's service. That is
the proper vision. So, to not see this is incomplete. That is
"phalgu-vairāgya". So, Srila Prabhupada would sometimes humorously say that,
actually, far from being renounced, if you give me donation one hand, I will put
ahead my next hand. So, what Prabhupada meant is that, not that he was greedy.
But the point meant that, Prabhu..., devotee, Prabhupada wanted to service
Krishna. And Prabhupada recognised the value of money in Krishna's service. So,
at one time, somebody, you know, you know, you know, somebody came to
Prabhupada. And gave a full, full suitcase. And Prabhupada opened the suitcase.
It was filled with cash. And Prabhupada's, you know, face lit up. And there was
some guests over there. They were shocked that this swami is, looks so excited
to see money. And then, Prabhupada immediately called disciples. And he said,
you know, you know, you know, you know, he, okay, say, you take this money. Took
out some money. And he says, you take this. And use it for, you know, printing
books. He says, you take this, and start the temple construction. You take this.
And send it there for that devotee. You take this. And do this. And just within
a few minutes, the suitcase was empty. And then, they realised that, you know,
Prabhupada was eager for money. But it was not money for, used for himself. He
wanted it all to be used for Krishna's service. And Prabhupada was happy. Not
just he saw, because he saw money the way materialists see money. Oh. Now, I
will get enjoyment. Prabhupada's heart was filled with the desire to serve
Krishna. And then, the money was a tool by which he would fulfill the desire to
serve Krishna.

So, you know, you know, "phalgu-vairāgya" is, you know, you know, you know, not,
you know, desirable. So, some people say that, you know, you know, internet is
filled with some garbage. So, better never go to the internet only. So, never go
to the internet. Now, this can be "phalgu-vairāgya". It is not necessary that it
has to be always "phalgu-vairāgya". Yes. It is true that there is a lot of
garbage on the internet. But it is also true that people are there on the
internet. And if we do not do our outreach on the internet, if we, devotees, do
not make our presence felt, there are impersonalists. There are people from
other religions. There are, you know, you know, other kinds of, you know,
shallow, you know, teachers. Who are going to be present over there. And they
will make their present felt. And people become att..., attracted over there.
So, on the other hand, if somebody sees, oh, there is potential for outreach
over here. And then, therefore, that person starts making arrangements. You
know. And then, that person starts tapping the potential. Now, there is danger.
No doubt. You know. One has to be cautious. So, when we say "yukta-vairāgya",
you know, we have to make sure that, you know, there is, "vai..." the "vairāgya"
is there. You know. It is not that the "vairāgya" is not there. So, if the
"vairāgya" is not there, if there is no detachment, then one will not be able to
keep the "yukta". So, the "vairāgya" has to be there along with the "yukta". You
know. Otherwise, we will take things. But instead of using them for Krishna's
service, we will use them for our own enjoyment. You know. Sometimes, what would
happen is that devotees had, early days of our movement, it would happen that,
when Srila Prabhupada started the Sunday love feast in New York. So, the
devotees were very enthusiastic. Oh, such a big feast. And one time, it happened
the devotees cook..., you know, they cooked a feast for the Sunday, big feast
for the Sunday feast programme. And the devotees, before the Sunday feast
programme, started, they ate all the "prasāda". And when Prabhupada started the
Sunday feast lecture, the temple managers were in panic. You know. The, they
said, you know, the Sunday feast programme was going on. And there were no
"prasāda" left. So, what was cooked, the Sunday feast is, opulent food is
cooked. And that is generally meant for the, you know, new devotees who are
kind, new people, potential devotees who are coming. Of course, devotees can
also take the "prasāda". But the idea of the resident devotees, eventually
devotees, finishing all the Sunday feast before the guests. For whom the
"prasāda" had come. Suddenly made. Before the guests have come, also. That was
quite shocking. And it was quite displeasing. So, then, the devotees told, you
cannot be selfish like this. Yes. They will cook more. So that everybody gets
enough to eat. But we have to keep the purpose in mind. So, "yukta-vairāgya",
some "vairāgya" has to be there. And while using certain technological gadgetry,
if we find ourselves abusing it, and, you know, you know, you know, not being
able to walk, we intend to use it right, but we, you know, con..., tend, we tend
to use it wrong. Then, what should we do? Then, we have to, you know, have some
precautions. Either we stop using it, or we have some precautions by which we
make sure that, you know, we do not very easily misuse it. So, as I said, you
know, just on the internet, there is danger, then there can be internet filters.
So that we devotees, so that people, what duties are using it. They do not go to
wrong sites. Or something like that. So, we just cannot reject the many of the
things in this world. Because if we reject them, then we will be fall..., we
will be falling behind. You know. You know. You know.

So, "yukta-vairāgya". "yukta-vairāgya" means recognising the potential of things
to be used in Krishna's service. And that, and it, use it accordingly. So, here,
Srila, that is what Srila Prabhupada talks about in his explanation of the
subject. You know. You know. And based on "Rūpa Gosvāmī"'s thought. So, then,
Prabhu..., you can read this. You know. So, Prabhupada further explains how, you
know, now, Prabhupada gives another example. You know. So, after talking about
jnana and "vairāgya". Now, jnana and "vairāgya" are considered to be good
qualities. So, does a devotee need to have good qualities? So, Prabhupada says:

"A devotee is naturally nonviolent and therefore doesn’t have to practice
nonviolence separately. Some people seek purification by joining a vegetarian
movement, but a devotee is automatically a vegetarian. He doesn’t need to
practice separately in this matter or to join any society for vegetarians. He is
automatically a vegetarian."

You know. You know. So, here, the point is, you know, you know, you know, Srila
Prabhupada is doing a summary study over here. So, sometimes, the, you know,
different points that are being mentioned, may not be very clear for us. So,
first, he talks about jnana. He talks about "vairāgya". And now, he is talking
about "sadguna". About good qualities. So, jnana and "vairāgya" can also
themselves be said to be good qualities. But other good qualities, also. Like
here, the quality of nonviolence. Now, Prabhupada says that, actually, if we
practice devotion, then naturally, good qualities will develop. Because the soul
has good qualities. And those good qualities are just covered over. Because of
the conditioning. And as we become purified by the practice of bhakti, those
conditionings are removed. And when the condionings are removed, then naturally,
you know, the good qualities become manifest. And here, the example is of
vegetarianism. And like that, there can be many, million subjects. There are
some societies which say, try to deaddict people of alcohol. So, it is quite an
alcoholic, a deaddiction can be a quite, you know, serious endeavor. And it is
not, it is no, it is no, it is not worthy. It is in some ways laudable. People
whose lives have been ruined by alcohol. If their lives can be brought back
online, by freeing them from the clutches of alcohol, that is good. But
actually, for, in bhakti, that happens as a byproduct. To the extent a person
practices devotional service seriously, then that person gets a higher
happiness. And with that higher happiness, the lower cravings go away. So, that
is what we have, from the beginning stages of our phase, spiritual life, we have
these four regulative principles we, if we follow. And those four regulative
principles take people, you know, take us away. You know. They take us away from
the self-defeating activities. That trouble many people. So, like that, the good
qualities develop in a devotee. A devotee does not have to do anything
separately for developing good qualities. And, you know, you know, you know,
Prabhupada tells from the story, from "Skanda Purāṇa". Of the hunter. Now, there
are various talks about hunters. There is, you know, "Mrigari" also was the
hunter. "Mriga". "ari". You know. "ari" means enemy. "Mriga" is animal. So, he
was an animal of, en..., enemy of animals. And he would not only kill them. But
he would torture them. And kill them. Half kill them. And leave them to suffer.
Torture for a long time. And after he became a devotee, then he was not even
ready to step on an ant. And even when he wanted to offer obeisances to his
spiritual masters. Now, somebody may rationalise. Oh, offering obeisances to
spiritual master is a higher purpose. So, why bother about ants? No. But that,
he was not like that. He was sensitive. So, he said, yes, I have to offer
obeisances by the spiritual master. But why should these ants have to die? So,
he was gently brushing away the ants. And then, offering obeisances. And then,
he was approaching a spiritual master with great gratitude. And reverence. So,
that way, that sensitivity comes that nonviolent, it is nonviolent sensitivity.
With nonviolence mentality comes in a devotee by the practice of devotion
itself. So again, devotion is not dependent on, you know, good qualities.
Rather, good qualities develop from devotion. So, it is like that, also,
devotion, earlier, we discussed, is not dependent on "jnana". And "vairāgya".
But at the same time, actually, if somebody has a devotion. Then, jnana and
"vairāgya" also develop.

        vāsudeve bhagavati
        bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ
        janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ
        jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam

So, "vāsudeve bhagavati". Lord Vasudeva, who is, you know, the Supreme Lord.
"bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ". "prayojitaḥ". If "bhakti-yogaḥ" is practiced toward
that person, so, it is a very poe..., it is a poetic metaphor over here. That
when a man and a woman unite, then children are born. So, Lord Vasudeva is the
Supreme Lord. "bhakti-yogaḥ" is the consort. And when there is union of the Lord
and the "bhakti", "bhakt...", and "bhakti-yogaḥ", then what happens? Two
children are born. Who are they? "janayaty". "janayaty" means are born. "āśu".
"āśu" is quickly. Not after a long time. "vairāgyaṁ". You know. "vairāgyaṁ".
Means renunciation. And "jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam". "ahaitukam" means
unmotivated. So, knowledge, which develop, that is unmotivated. That means, what
is unmotivated knowledge mean? That this knowledge is not motivated by the
desire for liberation. As is the knowledge of the impersonalists. Knowledge is
simply the knowledge that, you know, you know, deepens our love for Krishna. So,
jnana and "vairāgya" also develop in a devotee. You know. Now, after talking
about this, other, you know, the various elements of, which are, how the various
aspects of Vedic culture. How they are related. Or unrelated with the, with
bhakti. Now, in this, you know, "Nectar of Devotion", Srila Prabhupada, to,
continues the discussion. And he talks about two things. "ekanga". And
"anekanga". "ekanga". "anga" means limb. So, practicing one limb of bhakti.
"ekanga". Or "anekanga". Practicing many limbs of bhakti. And he says, you know,
you know, you know, for example, we know the nine limbs of bhakti. There are
devotees who attained perfection by practicing even one limb. So, "anga...":

        śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ
        smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
        arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ
        sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

So, "śravaṇaṁ". Who attained perfection by "śravaṇaṁ"? "Parīkṣit Mahārāja".
"kīrtanaṁ"? "Śukadeva Gosvāmī". "śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ". "smaraṇaṁ"? That is
"Prahlada Mahārāja". So, "śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ". "pāda-sevanam".
"pāda-sevanam" is Lakshmi Devi. "arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ". "arcanaṁ" is "Pṛthu
Mahārāja". "vandanaṁ" is when "ru...", "Akrūra" was coming into the templ...,
into Vrindavan, he offered beautiful prayers. "dāsyaṁ". That is "Hanumān" ji.
"sakhyam ātma-nivedanam". "sakhyam" is "Arjuna". And "ātma-nivedanam" is "Balī
Mahārāja". So, there are examples of, you know, devotees who exhi..., who
render..., who practice only one limb of bhakti. And by that, they attain
perfection. And there are other devotees. For example, there is, "Parīkṣit",
"Ambarīṣa Mahārāja", Prabhupada talks about over here. He engaged all his senses
in the Lord's service.

        sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor
        vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane

You know. You know. So, he uses mind to think of the Lord. He is "vacāṁsi". He
is speech to "vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane". This is to glorify the, this is glo...,
glo..., to glorify the Supreme Lord. To speak His glories. And like that, he
used all his senses.

        kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā

And therein, he says he made his desires into his servants. He did not become a
servant of his desires. And so, here, "Ambarīṣa Mahārāja" is beholding the Lord
with the eyes. Serving the Lord with His, you know, with His feet by going to
the holy places. Dancing in the kirtan of the Lord. So, his rasa is much more
exalted. It is much more, you know, sweeter. And, you know, sweeter not in terms
of necessarily an elevated rasa. But it is in terms of experiencing the richness
of bhakti. So, anekanga. And anekanga. So, one can practice bhakti with one
limb. Or with un..., eight limb, and many limbs. And both can help one to attain
perfection. Now, what should we, as sadhakas, do? You know. We should, our view,
our fundamental diameter should also be, you know, you know, you know, somehow,
or the other, fix the mind on Krishna.

        yena tena prakāreṇa manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet 

That is what we should focus on. You know. You know. So, when we focus on this,
"yena tena prakāreṇa", the idea is that, you know, fix the mind. So, sometimes,
we may find just to one limb absorb is so much. That we can completely go into
it. Some devotees like kirtans. And for them, kirtan itself is a whole universe.
Ok. This ren..., this, you know, this tune can be sung. This tune can be sung.
And hundred tunes can be there. And then, there can be variations in each tune.
And ok. With this tune, the mrdanga should be played like this. The kartal
should be played like this. Ok. With, with this tune, you know, maybe some other
background music is also helpful. With this tune, no background mu..., other
background music is required. So, like that, one can do so much analysis. And
in that way, one can move forward in one's spiritual life. Towards perfection.
So, "ekanga". Or "anekanga". It will depend on what, you know, will help us to
best absorb ourselves in Krishna. That is why Prabhupada says, you know, you
know, you know:

"liberation becomes the maidservant of the devotee."

And Prabhupada again quotes, mentions "Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura". He says:

        mukti mukula patanjali asmati sevyat

That mukti, by folded hands, serves such a devotee. Prabhupada has,
"maidservant". Now, from the, now, here, the wave of "vaidhi-bhakti" will end.
And "rāgānugā--bhakti" wave will start. So, Prabhupada points to that when he
describes, you know, Prabhupada:

"says that the regulative principles of devotional service are sometimes
described by authorities as the path of serving the Lord in opulence."

So, when we know the Lord's glories. And serve Him with that awareness, that is
"vaidhi-bhakti". In awareness of the Lord's glory. Now, from here onwards,
"rāgānugā-bhakti" will start. You know. So, "Spontaneous Devotional Service".
And Prabhupada starts by saying that, you know, you know:

"Examples of spontaneous devotional service can easily be seen in Kṛṣṇa’s direct
associates in Vṛndāvana."

And then:

"The spontaneous dealings of the residents of Vṛndāvana in relationship with
Kṛṣṇa are called rāgānugā."

So, now, there is sometimes a little confusion about these two terms. Let me
explain the meaning of these terms. With based, based on some, sample sanskrit
etymology. And then, we will look at the way they are explained in
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta". And then, try to see, see how they are explained in "The
Nectar of Devotion". So, "rāgātmikām". And "rāgānugā". So, "atmika" means
"atma". Related with the "atma". So:

        kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā

"kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā" means, this is a verse which comes in the Second
Chapter of the Bhagavada Gita. You know. You know. 2.43.

        kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā
        janma-karma-phala-pradām
        kriyā-viśeṣa-bahulāṁ
        bhogaiśvarya-gatiṁ prati

So, "kāmātmānaḥ". So, those whose "ātmā" is "kāma". That means they think that
their ess.., the essential purpose of their existence is to fulfill "kāma", is
to enjoy "kāma". "kāmātmānaḥ svarga-parā". So, "kāmātmānaḥ". So, "rāgātmikām"
means "raga" is the essence of their being. So, these are liberated devotees.
And their essential nature and purpose in fin..., perfection is to eternally
serve the Supreme Lord. So, that is "rāgātmikām". And then, there is "rāgānugā".
So, "anuga" means following. "rāgānugā" means those who follow the path of
"raga". So, it is said that, actually, who are the devotees who follow the path
of "raga"? "rāgānugā"? It is not that they are pure devotes. The difference, if
we remember, we discussed between, you know, in "vaidhi-bhakt...", it,
"vaidhi-bhakti" and sadh..., "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, in "sadhana-bhakti", there
are these two parts. The difference between "vaidhi-bhakti" and
"rāgānugā-bhakti" is in "vaidhi-bhakti", the instructions come primarily from
the "vidhi". From the scriptural rule. Whereas in "rāgānugā-bhakti", the
instructions come, the, or the impetus for service comes primarily from one's
own inspiration. That is the difference between "vaidhi" and "rāgānugā-bhakti".
So, now, here, let us understand "rāgātmikām" and "rāgānugā". By looking at what
is said in "Caitanya-caritāmṛta". You know. You know. So, let us look at
"Caitanya-caritāmṛta". Or "Madhya-līlā". 22.154. This is Damodar Maharaja's, you
know, waves of devotion. 

        virājantīm abhivyaktāṁ
        vraja-vāsi-janādiṣu
        rāgātmikām anusṛtā
        yā sā rāgānugocyate

So, "yā sā rāgānugocyate". This is "ucyate", is said to be. What is it said to
be? "rāga-anugā". "anugā" means following. So, that which is the, following in
the footsteps of those who are in the "rāga-mārga". And then, "virājantīm
abhivyaktāṁ". That which is "virājantīm". You know. It is, you know,
"virājantīm". Which, it illumines. And shines. "abhivyaktāṁ". It is fully
accepted. "vraja-vāsi-janādiṣu". So, "vraja-vāsi-janādiṣu". So, this
"rāgātmikām" bhakti is presently, is present primarily in the residents of
Vrindavan. "rāgātmikām anusṛtā". It is said, you know, following in their
footsteps. So, those whose are "rāgātmikām" bhaktas. And following the
specific, "yā sā rāgānugocyate". So, that means, you know, the "rāgātmikām"
devotees are the devotees in the spiritual world. Where eternally, they are
in the spiritual world. And "rāgānugā" are the devotees here who following the
footsteps of the devotees in spiritual world. So, described in the, you know,
in the elevated scriptures of the Gaudiya Vaishnava shastra that very devotees,
at the very advanced stage in devotion, then that devotee meditates on the Lord.
Meditates on the associates of the Lord. And finds a particular associate most
inspiring. And when a person finds this particular association most inspiring,
then there is a bound that is formed between that associate and the Lord. And
that bound is based on, you know, or centered around, you know, spiritual
attraction to Krishna. So, the devotee starts in a spiritual mood of honoring
and of serving, start take..., caring for serving for the, the Lord in the way
this eternal associate serving. That means there may be a devotee in the
spiritual world. Who is Yashoda Mayi. And she is serving Krishna. And then,
Yashoda Mayi, some associate from Nandan Mahārāja"'s house, one of the ladies
may fall in the material world. And when she falls in the material world, you
know, sorry, when one of the, you know, you know, you know, when one of the
eternal associates of the Lord is there in the spiritual world. Does not fall,
but one of the, there is an eternal associate of the Lord in the spiritual
world. And there is a sadhaka in the material world. That sadhaka wants to, you
know, want, aspires to following the footsteps. So, there, Yashoda Mayi, serving
in "Vātsalya-rasa". And there is a devotee here in the material world. And that
devotee aspires to following the footsteps of Yashoda Mayi. That means serve
Krishna in the, you know, in "Vātsalya-rasa". Now, this devotee in the material
world may be in a male or a female form. That does not matter. Because the
forms, that we have here, are just the results of past karma. They have got
nothing to do with the original "svarūpa" of the soul in the spiritual world.
So, whatever be the form, the devotee feels inspired to serve in a particular
way. And then, when that devotee acts in that, goes absorbed into that mood,
then, say, the mood of the "rāgātmikām" bhakti. And by that, gradually, the
devotee starts developing in that mood of devotion. And eventually, enters into
that mood. And enters into the spiritual world to become an assistant of Yashoda
Mayi in the spiritual world. So, that is how, ragan..., "rāgānugā-bhakti" is
modelled on the "rāgātmikām" bhakti. "anugā" means to follow. So, the
"rāgātmikām" bhaktas, "rāga" is the essence of those devotees. Yashoda Mayi, her
very essence, essence and purpose of existence is loving. And caring for
Krishna. And based on that, "rāgānugā". There may be some devotees who may serve
over here. In that mood. You know. You know. So:

        yā sā rāgānugocyate

That is "rāgānugā-bhakti". Now, "rāgānugā" is a very advanced stage. And we
cannot prematurely jump into it. So, once, some of the, when Srila Prabhupada's
disciples first came to Vrindavan. They were quite excited. Oh, this is the
pastime, the place of Krishna. Radha and Krishna performed "rasa-lila" over
here. All the wonderful pastimes performed over here. Then, they started going
here and there. And one day, the disciple of Srila Prabhupada found there is one
devotee who had locked himself up in the room. And they found that there was
some strange noises coming from that room. And they tried to hear, what was it?
They could not make out. And they found, it was actually, it seems to be like a
bird. But then, the relays, the, after that, it is a, it is a human being
chirping like a bird. Trying to imitate the sounds of a bird. And then, they
somehow got the door open. And they found, there was this devotee, who was
acting like a peacock. You know. And that devotee was moving the leg. You know.
Back. And forth. Like a peacock. Neck back. And forth. And trying to make sound
like a peacock. And they said, what, what are you doing? He said, actually, I
had gone, gone to an advanced guru in Vrindavan. And he told me that you are a
peacock in the spiritual world. So, I am practicing now. I am practicing as a
peacock, so that I, when I go back to the spiritual world, I will be a
well-seasoned peacock. So, Prabhupada heard this. This is nonsense, Prabhupada
said. You know. We cannot prematurely, artificially start imagining things like
this. It is true that when a devotee becomes advanced, you know, you know,
"Bhaktivinoda Thakur" describes in "Jaiva-dharma" that when a devotee becomes
very advanced, the spiritual master calls the devotee. And tells. And reveals
the "svarūpa" of that devotee. In the spiritual world. Of course, it is not
necessary that that has to happen for everyone. Because, for some people,
"svarūpa-siddhi" can happen after death, also. You know. So, it is not to say
that it has to happen for everyone in this life. And it is not that if it does
not happen, that means one is not necessarily practi..., not practicing
devotional service properly. No. One should not get paranoid about these things.
But let us look another aspect about, you know, "rāgānugā-bhakti". Yeah.

        iṣṭe svārasikī rāgaḥ
        paramāviṣṭatā bhavet
        tan-mayī yā bhaved bhaktiḥ
        sātra rāgātmikoditā

"sātra". "sātra" means that is "rāgātmikoditā". It is said to be "rāgātmikām".
And then, you know, you know, the, so, this is "iṣṭe svārasikī rāgaḥ". Unto the
desired object of the life. So, for devotees, that is Krishna. You know. So,
"svāra". "svārasikī". "svārasi...", "rasa" means the sweetness. Mellow. Flavor.
"svārasikī" means one's own mellow. "rāgaḥ". "rāgaḥ" means attachment.
"paramāviṣṭatā", "paramāviṣṭatā", "para...", "paramāviṣṭatā bhavet".
"paramāviṣṭatā". "para...", that means, supre..., absorption in the service of
the Supreme. "bhavet". There is. "tan-mayī yā bhaved bhaktiḥ". "tan-mayī yā
bhaved bhaktiḥ". You know. So, there is, "tan-mayī" means attachment. One,
"bhaved bhaktiḥ". That which, attachment, which is filled with "bhaktiḥ". So,
"sātra rāgātmikoditā". So, when the devotee has very deep sense of devotion for
Krishna, very strong attraction for Krishna, that is called "rāgātmikām". And
when, there is a devotee, who models one's own life based on, you know, that
advanced devotee's, that liberated eternal associate's, you know, devotional
service, that is called as "rāgānugā". Now, you know, the word "rāgaḥ" means
color. So, "" means one is trying to dev..., imbibe that color. And
"rāgātmikām" means that color is deeply internalised. So, what does this color
refer to? Just as when, if I wear red color glasses, then everything seems red
to me. So, you know, "rāgātmikām" means that the "rāgaḥ" is so deep. For Yashoda
Mayi, the "rāgaḥ", the "Vātsalya" bhava is so deep that Yashoda Mayi naturally
sees everything in relationship with Krishna. And even Krishna Himself from the
motherly perspective. So, she did not see Krishna to be God. She sees Krishna as
a child. Who needs my protection. Who needs my discipline. Who needs my mother's 
milk. Or He needs my, needs me to feed Him. Otherwise, He will just stay hungry.
So, that is, oh, so, that is "rāgātmikām". That means the very essence of one's
life is colored. By that, that feeling. And "rāgānugā" means one is trying to
develop that feeling. One is trying to develop that coloring of the
consciousness. Now, after this, describing "rāgānugā" and "rāgātmikām", then he
moves on to disc..., talk about two kinds of "rāgātmikām" bhatis. There is
"sambandha-rūpā". And there is "kāmā-rūpā". So, to understand "sambandha-rūpā"
and "kāmā-rūpā", let us look another verse. A famous verse from the
"Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam". You know. You know. You know. "Svarupa Gosvāmī" quotes
this. 7.1.31.

        gopyaḥ kāmād bhayāt kaṁso
        dveṣāc caidyādayo nṛpāḥ
        sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ snehād
        yūyaṁ bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho

So, here, there is a description of the different ways in which devotees can
attain perfection. So, before and after these verses, if we read the verses, you
know, you know, the point of this verse becomes clear. The point of this verse
is that all these people, in this way, they absorb, in these ways, they absorb
their mind in Krisna. And by absorbing their mind in Krishna, they attain
perfection. So, "gopyaḥ kāmād". So, by "kāmād", the gopis were attracted to
Krishna. "bhayāt kaṁso". It is straightforward. "Kamsa" was extremely fearful.
You know. It is said that, you know, "Kamsa", at night, when his wives would
come next to him, he would just, hey, this is "Kṛṣṇa" and "Balarāma" coming. He
was so shaken, oh, "Kṛṣṇa" and "Balarāma" have come. So, now, how many people,
when they see their wife coming, they think about "Kṛṣṇa" and "Balarāma"? Or
when they see their husband coming, they think of "Kṛṣṇa" and "Balarāma"? It is
very difficult. We tend to see our spouse. And we, material thoughts come up in
our mind. But "Kamsa", we could say, was so Krishna Conscious. That when he saw
his spou..., wife, he did not see his wife. He saw "Kṛṣṇa". Or he saw
"Balarāma". You know. So, how is that? This boy. So fearful. That "Kṛṣṇa" is
going to come. And kill me. So, now, again, the point here is, not that fear is
glorified. It is not, if we remember, "ānukūlye...", "uttamā", "bhaktir" is,
"ānukūl", "anyā...":

        anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ
        jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
        ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-
        śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

"ānukūlyena". So, it should be with the intent to please. You know. So, he did
not intend to please. So, here, the point is not whether his intention was there
or not. The point was that he was absorbed in Krishna. And then:

        dveṣāc caidyādayo nṛpāḥ
        
"dveṣāc". That means, out of envy, "caidyādayo". "caidya" is referring to
"Śiśupāla". So, he was very envious of Krishna. And he blasphemed Krishna. And
Krishna tolerated his blasphemy many times. Because He had given a
benediction to "Śiśupāla"'s mother. That I will tolerate up to hundred
blasphemies. But if he might, blasphemies me more than that, then I will kill
him. "Sundaraja Surya yagna" when Krishna was offered, the, the "agri" puja.
"Śiśupāla" became so enviously outraged. He had blaspheming, blaspheming
Krishna. And, you know, you know, just as, actually, on the more positive side,
when "Keshav Kashmiri" started speaking, so, hundred verses glorifying Krishna,
or glorifying Ganga came through his mouth. So, there was a flow of nectar. You
know. You know. But when "Śiśupāla" was angry, he started, he was out of that
envy, he started blaspheming Krishna. And hundred and more blasphemies came out.
And Krishna said, now, it is, "Śiśupāla" had got so angry that he had forgotten
to count. But Krishna had not forgotten to count. And when the blasphemy count
exceeded the mark, then tuck. Krishna sent His "Sudarshana". Tuck. He was cut
off. So, so, but he was thinking of Krishna even when he was cut off. His head
was cut off.

        sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ snehād
        yūyaṁ bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho

You know. You know. "sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ". The "Vṛṣṇis" or "Yuvanshi"s, they had
relationship with Krishna based on, you know, the, Krishna was their child. Or
Krishna was their unc..., cousin. Or Krishna was their uncle. Or Krishna was
their grandfather. Like that, they had relationships, also. And "vṛṣṇayaḥ
sneh...":

        sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ snehād
        yūyaṁ bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho

So, "yūyaṁ", here, "Nārada Muni" is speaking to the "Pāṇḍavas". Especially
"Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja". And he is saying, saying that how are you related? You
are relating "snehād". Your relationship is of affection. And then, "bhaktyā",
"vibh...", "bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho", then all of us are, "Nārada Muni" is putting
himself in a lower position than everyone else. And he is saying, "bhaktyā vayaṁ
vibho", how are we related? We are related through the feeling of devotion. So,
now, how many are there? Here, "gopyaḥ kāmād". "bhayāt kaṁso". "dveṣāc
caidyādayo nṛpāḥ". The three are there in the first two lines. And then,
"sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ". So, this six. One more is the "sambandhād". Then,
"snehād yūyaṁ". "yūyaṁ". You are out of "snehād". That is the sixth one. And
seventh is "bhaktyā vayaṁ". So, we devotees are out of bhakt..., are in bhakti.
Now, this seven, you know, you know, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" reduces to four, two. How
does he reduces them to two? He reduces them to two by, you know, analysis. So,
which are the eternal rasas? So, certainly, Kamsa is not eternally present in
the spiritual world. You know. Fearing Krishna. So, fear is not anikul to
bhakti. Similarly, envy is not anikul to bhakti. So, he will lose those two
out.

        ... bhayāt kaṁso
        dveṣāc caidyādayo nṛpāḥ

These two, he lose out. Then, there is, you know, you know, "sambandhād
vṛṣṇayaḥ". That "Vṛṣṇis" are out of "sambandhād". Now, they are, now, so, the
"Vṛṣṇis", they have very affect..., intimate affection for Krishna. And their,
their affection is very exalted. And very sweet. And that is also "rāgātmikām".
Because there is an eternal spiritual world. Eternally, they are serving in the
spiritual world. Now, "snehād yūyaṁ". So, the "Pāṇḍavas" are in affection. So,
is "Pāṇḍavas" "rāgātmikām"? Not necessarily. So, "Pāṇḍavas", they have very
sweet relationship with Krishna. But "Rūpa Gosvāmī" explains that, quite often,
you know, their feelings are filled with awe and reverence. They are aware of
Krishna's greatness. You know. And therefore, he says, this is also not an
eternal category. And this is also not a, you know, you know, not very distinct
category. And then, "yū...", "bhaktyā". "yūyaṁ". So, he said, these are, so
when, he says, "Nārada Muni", out of his humility, is putting himself, we had
serving, are, we are actually meditating on Him out of bhakti. So, this is more
of, at the level of duty. Obligation. And this is also not eternal. You know.
So, at the eternal level, bhakti is in a particular "rasa". You know. So, he
says, in this way, the, the ways of "rāgātmikām" bhakti are reduced from these
seven categories in this verse to two. The two are, you know, "sambandhād". And
"kāmāt". And that is how we have "kāmā-rūpā". And "sambandha-rūpā". Now, in one
sense, we could see that, you know, you know, "kāmā-rūpā" is the sort of type of
"sambandha-rūpā", only. Because even the devotee..., devotees, and "kāmā".
"sambandha" means relationship. And "kāmā" means also relation..., you know,
"kāmā" means, you know, you know, attraction. You know. We will look at what
kind of attraction it is. And that also involves some "sambandha". But in a
technical sense, this "kāmā" is put separate. Because it is so pre-eminent. It
is so extraordinary. It is so special. That there is nothing like it. You know.
So, that, that is special. So, even the "Yadus". The "Vṛṣṇis", they are also
very exalted devotees. And they are also eternal associates of the Lord. And
the, so, one can model oneself on those eternal associates, also.
"sambandha-rūpā". But especially, the Gaudiya Vaishnavas, they exalt the
devotees in Vrindavan. And especially, you know:

        ramya kacid upasana vraja-vadhu-vargena va kalpita

There is no one who worships like the "vadhu"s of Vrindavan. That is the gopis.
So, they are the topmost devotees. And, you know, "kāmāt". So, now, here, "Rūpa
Gosvāmī" is quo..., at once, prompt to differentiate between "kāmā" and "prema".
So, we have discussed this earlier that:

        ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā — tāre bali ‘kāma’
        kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare ‘prema’ nāma

So, "kāma" is selfish. "kāma" is, you know, based on the desire for one's own
gratification. Whereas "prema" is based on the desire for Krishna's pleasure.
So, the gopis, they may appear to be selfish sometimes. In the sense that,
sometimes, the gopis may be very, very careful about their appearance. The way
they are decorating themselves. The way they are dressing themselves. And they
may seem to be very conscientious. But the purpose of that consciousness is
then, conscientious is Krishna's pleasure. They want to please Krishna. They
know that Krishna is going to behold us. And if we are beautiful, Krishna will
be pleased. So, although their actions may sometimes appear selfish, they are
selfless. They are motivated by the desire to please Krishna. And we see that
from another occasion. When Krishna plays the flute. And calls them. Then, what
happens? Now, you are not thinking. You know. Sometimes, you know, the, a couple
has to go out. And they, husband says, now, it is time. We have to leave. And
the wife says, no. I have to dress. I have to dress. And the wife keeps waiting.
Kee..., hu..., keeps the husband waiting. Waiting. Waiting. But she is concerned
about her appearance so much. She is not concerned there about, you know, making
sure that the whatever appointment the, whatever one, pla..., place one has to
go to, one has to reach on time. So, the gopis are not like that. Gopis are not
telling Krish..., Krishna, we are not ready. Wait. So, when Krishna plays His
flute, calling the gopis. They just leave. And come. Rush off immediately. And
it is described that sometimes the gopis are not even dressed properly. So,
there is, sometimes, when they are applying some, you know, you know, masquerade
on their eyes. And, you know, masquerade is applied only on one eyes. And the
other eye, it is not applied. Or the, you know, dress which is meant for one
part of the body, is put on another part of the body. Or they have, they have an
ornament only in one ear. And not in the other ear. Now, this would, considered
to be a terrible thing for, you know, mo..., most men would feel that if
somebody ha..., if we are forced to appear like this. And we think, what will
people think about me? They would be repelled. Horrified. Even if they are
forced, they will not come, they will try to restri..., resist coming out in
public. Not properly decorated. And adorned. But then, when the gopis saw that
Krishna called them, immediately the gopis left. Their concern is simply
Krishna's pleasure. So, for Krishna's pleasure, they will dress themselves very
opulently. Very beautifully. And other times, for Krishna's, they will just
leave everything. And go. Whatever is required for Krishna's pleasure. So, their
love is completely pure. And transcendental. And Prabhupada would often say,
here, also, "Rūpa Gosvāmī" would say this point that "Chaitanya Mahaprabhu", you
know, was such a strict renunciate. Why would he be attracted to anything, you
know, which involves sexual, sexuality? Now, no. He would never be attacted. But
that is transcendental. We have discussed this difference earlier in our "Nectar
of Instruction", also. While we were discussing about "Rādhārani"'s love. That
there is negative axis. There is positive axis. The male-female attraction is in
the negative axis. Then, at zero, is, there is no attraction. And on the
positive axis, there is the attraction between Krishna and the devotees. So, the
word "kāma" is used. But "kāma", it, this is not material "kāma". This is
actually, it is very pure desire. But just because that desire cannot be
understood at the material level, so, therefore, you know, to give us a glimpse
of the intensity of that desire, the word "kāma" is used. And it is pure
transcendental desire. And this, so, you know, you know, the "rāgānugā" bhaktas,
they model themselves on the "rāgātmikām" bhaktas. Those who are "rāgātmikām".
So, in the advanced stage, a devotee thinks, ok, this is a particular associate.
And I want to model. I want to serve Krishna the way this devotee is serving.
And in that way, one can absorb oneself in "rāgānugā-bhakti". So, we will
discuss more about "rāgānugā-bhakti" in our next class.

Thank you. Hare Krishna.
